## *Why are More Trade-Open Countries More Likely to Repress the Media?*

#### Abstract

Why are more trade-open countries more likely to repress the media, even though media freedom is positively correlated with general indices of economic globalization? To resolve this surprisingly under-reported empirical puzzle, I argue that economic globalization exerts contradictory pressures on state-media relations. Economic liberalization of trade, foreign direct investment, and foreign portfolio capital should generate incentives for states to repress the media, as states seek to manage the domestic distributive conflicts engendered by liberalization. However, whereas international investors have a stake in the transparency of foreign countries, international traders do not. Thus trade openness should have a uniquely negative effect on media freedom, as investment counterbalances but trade enables the repressive tendency generated by liberalization. To test these expectations, I use a mixed-methods research design combining statistical analysis of all available country-years between 1972 and 2003 and within-case process-tracing on two hard cases: Argentina and Mexico in the 1990s. Trade openness is found to have a large and highly robust negative effect on media freedom: for a trade-closed country moving to the mean trade level in the sample, I expect the probability of media freedom to decrease by as much as .46. Several robustness checks including tests for reverse causality, Bayesian model averaging, and genetic matching all suggest this relationship is not an artifact of omitted variables, outliers, endogeneity, model selection, or the non-random assignment of trade openness. The article has important implications for current research on the globalization-democracy nexus and the comparative politics of media.

#### Author Information
Justin Murphy, PhD
Assistant Professor
Politics and International Relations
University of Southampton
Email: [j.murphy@soton.ac.uk](mailto:j.murphy@soton.ac.uk)

#### Acknowledgments

I would like to thank Christopher Wlezien, Orfeo Fioretos, Roselyn Hsueh, Miguel Glatzer, Steven Barnett, Magno Silva, and Judith Townend for their comments on earlier drafts of this article. The Department of Political Science at Temple University provided financial support for this article as part of my doctoral dissertation, "Mass Media and the Domestic Politics of Economic Globalization." An earlier version of this article was presented at the 2014 annual meeting of the Political Studies Association in Manchester, UK.

#### Replication materials

All the data and scripts necessary to reproduce this article are available at [https://github.com/jmrphy/globalization_media_freedom](https://github.com/jmrphy/globalization_media_freedom).

